top/virtual_platform.rst, before:

GVSOC
=====

Usage
-----

The virtual platform must be launched through the common runner called *pulp-run*.

The specified platform must be *gvsoc* (through option *-\\-platform*) and the only mandatory option is either *-\\-config-file* or *-\\-config* in order to give the system configuration to simulate (see next section).

As the virtual platform will generate several temporary files, it is also good to launch it from a specific folder or to specify it through the *-\\-dir* option.

All the other options for the platform must be given through the configuration file (see next sections). The most common one is the binary to be simulated. A few common options has a shortcut as a direct option to *pulp-run*, you can execute this command to get them: ::

  $ pulp-run --platform=gvsoc --config=gap_rev1 --help

After the options, the set of commands to execute must be specified. The usual ones are *prepare* for generating the platform stimuli (e.g. to prepare the flash image containing the test binary), and *run* for running the simulation.

Here is a full example: ::

  $ pulp-run --platform=gvsoc --config=gap_rev1 --binary=test prepare run


Configuration
-------------

The virtual platform is simulating the architecture which is described by the specified system configuration, described with a JSON file.

This can be first done through the option *-\\-config-file* to give the path of the JSON file. This can be either an absolute path or a relative path, in which case the config in search in the paths given by the environment variable SDK_CONFIGS_PATH, which contains a list of possible paths separated by *:*.

This can also be done through the option *-\\-config* which gives the name of the configuration to simulate. This is equivalent to *-\\-config-file=chips/<name>/<name>.json* where *<name>* is the value of the option.

The configuration is a high-level description of the architecture, where all important properties are specified (e.g. memory sizes). This high-level view of the architecture is used to generate a low-level and detailed view of the architecture which is used by gvsoc to know what to instantiate, configure and connect. Both levels can be customized by the user. The high-level view is called the template, and can be customized to easily change architecture properties such as memory sizes. The low-level view is called the configuration and can be customized to change properties of one specific component, such as a specific behavior of one core.


Options
-------

Options to the virtual platform are passed by customizing the system configuration.

This can be first done using the option *-\\-property=<path>=<value>* to specify a property in the JSON file to be overwritten. <path> is giving the property path in the JSON file where the property must be overwritten and <value> the value to be set. As a JSON file is hierarchical, <path> describes a hierarchical path, similar to a file system path. As described in the previous section, a property can be changed either in the template or in the configuration. Any property beginning with *config/* will change a property in the configuration while the others will change it in the template.

Here is an example to activate instructions traces: ::

  pulp-run --platform=gvsoc --config=gap_rev1 --binary=test prepare run --property=config/gvsoc/trace=insn

There is however a shortcut for this property, which can be set with this option: ::

  pulp-run --platform=gvsoc --config=gap_rev1 --binary=test prepare run --trace=insn

The second way to customize the system configuration is to provide a INI-style configuration file containing a set of properties through the option *-\\-config-user* . The JSON path of a property is the concatenation of the section name, and the INI property name.

Here is an example of such a file to activate instruction traces: ::

  [config.gvsoc]
  trace=insn

And the command to specify it: ::

  pulp-run --platform=gvsoc --config=gap_rev1 --binary=test prepare run --config-user=myconfig.ini

In both ways, refer to other sections to get the various properties which can be set to configure the system.



System traces
-------------

The virtual platform allows dumping architecture events to help developers debugging their applications by better showing what is happening in the system.

For example, it can show instructions being executed, DMA transfers, events generated, memory accesses and so on.

This feature can be enabled and configured through the option *-\\-trace*. This option takes an argument which specifies a regular expression of the path in the architecture where the traces must be enabled. All components whose path matches the specified one will dump traces. Several paths can be specified by using the option several times. Here is an example that activates instruction traces for core 0 and core 1: ::

  pulp-run --platform=gvsoc --config=gap_rev1 --binary=test prepare run --trace=pe0/insn --trace=pe1/insn"

The trace file should look like the following: ::

  194870000: 19487: [/sys/board/chip/soc/cluster/pe1/insn] M 1c001a96 c.li                a2, 0, 0           a2=00000000 
  194870000: 19487: [/sys/board/chip/soc/cluster/pe0/insn] M 1c001a2c beq                 a1, s4, 76         a1:00000020  s4:00000025

There is usually one line per event, although an event can sometimes takes several lines to display more information.

The number on the left gives the timestamp of the event, in picoseconds, and the one right after the number of cycles. Both are given because different blocks like clusters can have different frequencies. The timestamp is absolute and will increase linearly while the cycle count is local to the frequency domain.

The second part, which is a string, gives the path in the architecture where the event occurred. This is useful to differentiate blocks of the same kind that generate the same event. This path can also be used with the *-\\-trace* option to reduce the number of events.

The third part, which is also a string, is the information dumped by the event, and is totally specific to this event. In our example, the core simulator is just printing information about the instruction that has been executed.

One difficulty is usually to find out which paths should be activated to get the needed information. One method is to dump all the events with *-\\-trace=.**, then find out which one are interesting and then put them on the command line. Here are the paths for the main components (note that this can differ from one chip to another):

========================================= ===============================
Path                                      Description
========================================= ===============================
/sys/board/chip/cluster/pe0               Processing element, useful to see the IOs made by the core, and the instruction it executes. You can add */iss* to just get instruction events
/sys/board/chip/cluster/event_unit        Hardware synchronizer events, useful for debugging inter-core synchronization mechanisms
/sys/board/chip/cluster/pcache            Shared program cache accesses
/sys/board/chip/cluster/l1_ico            Shared L1 interconnect
/sys/board/chip/cluster/l1/bankX          L1 memory banks (the X should be replaced by the bank number)
/sys/board/chip/soc/l2                    L2 memory accesses
/sys/board/chip/cluster/dma               DMA events
========================================= ===============================

At first, the most interesting traces are the core instruction traces. As they show not only the instructions executed but also the registers accessed, their content and the memory accesses, they are very useful for debugging bugs like memory corruptions.

Here is an example: ::

  4890000: 489: [/sys/board/chip/soc/cluster/pe0/insn] M 1c001252 p.sw  0, 4(a5!)  a5=10000010  a5:1000000c  PA:1000000c

The event information dumped for executed instructions is using the following format: ::

  <address> <instruction> <operands> <operands info>

<address> is the address of the instruction.

<instruction> is the instruction label.

<operands> is the part of the decoded operands.

<operands info> is giving details about the operands values and how they are used.

The latter information is using the following convention:

  - When a register is accessed, its name is displayed followed by *=* if it is written or *:* if it is read. In case it is read and written, the register appears twice. It is followed by its value, which is the new one in case it is written.

  - When a memory access is done, *PA:* is displayed, followed by the address of the access.

  - The order of the statements is following the order on the decoded instruction

The memory accesses which are displayed are particularly interesting for tracking memory corruptions as they can be used to look for accesses to specific locations.


VCD traces
----------

The virtual platform can dump VCD traces which show the state of several components over the time, like the cores PC, the DMA transfers, etc, and thus gives a better overview than the system traces.

Configuration
.............

VCD tracing can be activated through the following option: ::

  pulp-run --platform=gvsoc --config=gap_rev1 --binary=test prepare run --event=.*

Once the platform is run, this will generate a VCD file called *all.vcd* in the build folder.



Display
.......

Any VCD viewer can be used to display the traces. On Linux the free gtkwave viewer can be used. For example to display the PC traces, you can launch it with: ::

  gtkwave <vcdFilePath>

Then click on Search->Search Signal Regexp, enter "pc", click on Select All and Insert, and close the box. You should now see the PC traces in the view, you can zoom out to see the full window.

.. Gtkwave script generation
.. .........................

.. In case gtkwave is used, a script can be automatically generated that will pre-configure all interesting signals. For that the following option must be used: ::

..   $ make clean all run CONFIG_OPT="gvsoc/vcd/active gvsoc/vcd/gtkw"

.. You should see at the beginning of the simulation that says that a script has been generated. Just open it with gtkwave and you should see all signals already configured in the view.

.. This view contains some pre-defined groups that are very useful for quickly opening and closing architectures parts. It also contains a group called debug, that contains more high-level debug information like function name, disassembled instructions and so on.


Application profiling
---------------------

The virtual platform is for now not providing any particular feature in terms of profiling except for hardware performance counters whose most of them are modeled.

To use them, the test should configure and use them as on the real silicon, with the difference that on gvsoc all performance counters are implemented, not only one.



Timing models
-------------

Timing models are always active, there is no specific option to set to activate them. They are mainly timing the core model so that the main stalls are modeled. This includes branch penalty, load-use penalty an so on. The rest of the architecture is slightly timed. Remote accesses are assigned a fixed cost and are impacted by bandwidth limitation, although this still not reflect exactly the HW (the bus width may be different). L1 contentions are modeled with no priority. DMA is modeled with bursts, which gets assigned a cost. All UDMA interfaces are finely modeled.



Power models
------------

This is for now a very preliminary work. Power traces can be showed when VCD traces are activated. Each power source is able to register an amount of energy, which is showed inside a VCD trace as a pulse.

For now only the core is registering the energy consumed by an instruction, but all instructions are assigned a fixed cost, which just has an arbitrary value.

A more detailed power report will soon be produced, and power sources added.



Devices
-------

The virtual platform is by default simulating only a stand-alone chip with a few default devices which are required to boot a simple example. Device models such as camera, flash or microphones can be connected in order to run full applications.

The devices to be simulated must be specified using the standard runner feature for customizing peripherals, see :ref:`device_config`.


.. GDB
.. ---

.. To use GDB with the virtual platform, the Pulp debug bridge must be used to connect to the virtual platform
.. and to open an RSP server where GDB can be connected to communicate with the virtual platform as if the real
.. chip would be used.

.. For that, the application must first be configured with the following option: ::

..   $ make conf gdb=1

.. Then the virtual platform must be launched with the usual command: ::

..   $ make run

.. This should start the virtual platform but quickly stop waiting for an incoming connection with the following 
.. message: ::

..   Proxy listening on port 37539

.. The Pulp debug bridge must then be launched and connected from another terminal with the same SDK configured
.. in the same way, with the following command: ::

..   $ plpbridge --config=<config file path> gdb wait --rsp-port=2345

.. The config file must be the one generated for the application being debugged. Its path
.. can be seen on the pulp-run command which is generated when *make run* is executed.

.. The RSP port can be any port, it just needs to correspond to the one used when opening GDB.

.. Then from another terminal, GDB must be launched and connected: ::

..   $ riscv32-unknown-elf-gdb
..   $ (gdb) target remote :2345

.. The port specified here must be the same as the one specified in the plpbridge command.

.. There are currently a few GDB issues. First it is using by default the 64bit mode if no binary is specified.
.. So a binary must always be specified until this is fixed (with option file). Then breakpoints with compressed instructions generate a GDB error. To avoid it, the following gdb property must be set: ::

..   $ (gdb) set riscv use_compressed_breakpoint off

.. There are also a few limitations, watchpoints are not supported.

Most usefull commands
---------------------

For activating instruction traces: ::

  pulp-run --platform=gvsoc --config=gap_rev1 --binary=test prepare run --trace=insn

For activating all traces: ::

  pulp-run --platform=gvsoc --config=gap_rev1 --binary=test prepare run --trace=.*

For activating VCD traces (traces are dumped to the file *all.vcd): ::

  pulp-run --platform=gvsoc --config=gap_rev1 --binary=test prepare run --event=.*

Commit message:

Added doc for new gvsoc option --debug-syms

top/virtual_platform.rst, after:

GVSOC
=====

Usage
-----

The virtual platform must be launched through the common runner called *pulp-run*.

The specified platform must be *gvsoc* (through option *-\\-platform*) and the only mandatory option is either *-\\-config-file* or *-\\-config* in order to give the system configuration to simulate (see next section).

As the virtual platform will generate several temporary files, it is also good to launch it from a specific folder or to specify it through the *-\\-dir* option.

All the other options for the platform must be given through the configuration file (see next sections). The most common one is the binary to be simulated. A few common options has a shortcut as a direct option to *pulp-run*, you can execute this command to get them: ::

  $ pulp-run --platform=gvsoc --config=gap_rev1 --help

After the options, the set of commands to execute must be specified. The usual ones are *prepare* for generating the platform stimuli (e.g. to prepare the flash image containing the test binary), and *run* for running the simulation.

Here is a full example: ::

  $ pulp-run --platform=gvsoc --config=gap_rev1 --binary=test prepare run


Configuration
-------------

The virtual platform is simulating the architecture which is described by the specified system configuration, described with a JSON file.

This can be first done through the option *-\\-config-file* to give the path of the JSON file. This can be either an absolute path or a relative path, in which case the config in search in the paths given by the environment variable SDK_CONFIGS_PATH, which contains a list of possible paths separated by *:*.

This can also be done through the option *-\\-config* which gives the name of the configuration to simulate. This is equivalent to *-\\-config-file=chips/<name>/<name>.json* where *<name>* is the value of the option.

The configuration is a high-level description of the architecture, where all important properties are specified (e.g. memory sizes). This high-level view of the architecture is used to generate a low-level and detailed view of the architecture which is used by gvsoc to know what to instantiate, configure and connect. Both levels can be customized by the user. The high-level view is called the template, and can be customized to easily change architecture properties such as memory sizes. The low-level view is called the configuration and can be customized to change properties of one specific component, such as a specific behavior of one core.


Options
-------

Options to the virtual platform are passed by customizing the system configuration.

This can be first done using the option *-\\-property=<path>=<value>* to specify a property in the JSON file to be overwritten. <path> is giving the property path in the JSON file where the property must be overwritten and <value> the value to be set. As a JSON file is hierarchical, <path> describes a hierarchical path, similar to a file system path. As described in the previous section, a property can be changed either in the template or in the configuration. Any property beginning with *config/* will change a property in the configuration while the others will change it in the template.

Here is an example to activate instructions traces: ::

  pulp-run --platform=gvsoc --config=gap_rev1 --binary=test prepare run --property=config/gvsoc/trace=insn

There is however a shortcut for this property, which can be set with this option: ::

  pulp-run --platform=gvsoc --config=gap_rev1 --binary=test prepare run --trace=insn

The second way to customize the system configuration is to provide a INI-style configuration file containing a set of properties through the option *-\\-config-user* . The JSON path of a property is the concatenation of the section name, and the INI property name.

Here is an example of such a file to activate instruction traces: ::

  [config.gvsoc]
  trace=insn

And the command to specify it: ::

  pulp-run --platform=gvsoc --config=gap_rev1 --binary=test prepare run --config-user=myconfig.ini

In both ways, refer to other sections to get the various properties which can be set to configure the system.



System traces
-------------

The virtual platform allows dumping architecture events to help developers debugging their applications by better showing what is happening in the system.

For example, it can show instructions being executed, DMA transfers, events generated, memory accesses and so on.

This feature can be enabled and configured through the option *-\\-trace*. This option takes an argument which specifies a regular expression of the path in the architecture where the traces must be enabled. All components whose path matches the specified one will dump traces. Several paths can be specified by using the option several times. Here is an example that activates instruction traces for core 0 and core 1: ::

  pulp-run --platform=gvsoc --config=gap_rev1 --binary=test prepare run --trace=pe0/insn --trace=pe1/insn"

It is also possible to get debug information about the binary being executed by adding the option *-\\-debug-syms**.

The trace file should look like the following: ::

  194870000: 19487: [/sys/board/chip/soc/cluster/pe1/insn] M 1c001a96 c.li                a2, 0, 0           a2=00000000 
  194870000: 19487: [/sys/board/chip/soc/cluster/pe0/insn] M 1c001a2c beq                 a1, s4, 76         a1:00000020  s4:00000025

There is usually one line per event, although an event can sometimes takes several lines to display more information.

The number on the left gives the timestamp of the event, in picoseconds, and the one right after the number of cycles. Both are given because different blocks like clusters can have different frequencies. The timestamp is absolute and will increase linearly while the cycle count is local to the frequency domain.

The second part, which is a string, gives the path in the architecture where the event occurred. This is useful to differentiate blocks of the same kind that generate the same event. This path can also be used with the *-\\-trace* option to reduce the number of events.

The third part, which is also a string, is the information dumped by the event, and is totally specific to this event. In our example, the core simulator is just printing information about the instruction that has been executed.

One difficulty is usually to find out which paths should be activated to get the needed information. One method is to dump all the events with *-\\-trace=.**, then find out which one are interesting and then put them on the command line. Here are the paths for the main components (note that this can differ from one chip to another):

========================================= ===============================
Path                                      Description
========================================= ===============================
/sys/board/chip/cluster/pe0               Processing element, useful to see the IOs made by the core, and the instruction it executes. You can add */iss* to just get instruction events
/sys/board/chip/cluster/event_unit        Hardware synchronizer events, useful for debugging inter-core synchronization mechanisms
/sys/board/chip/cluster/pcache            Shared program cache accesses
/sys/board/chip/cluster/l1_ico            Shared L1 interconnect
/sys/board/chip/cluster/l1/bankX          L1 memory banks (the X should be replaced by the bank number)
/sys/board/chip/soc/l2                    L2 memory accesses
/sys/board/chip/cluster/dma               DMA events
========================================= ===============================

At first, the most interesting traces are the core instruction traces. As they show not only the instructions executed but also the registers accessed, their content and the memory accesses, they are very useful for debugging bugs like memory corruptions.

Here is an example: ::

  4890000: 489: [/sys/board/chip/soc/cluster/pe0/insn] M 1c001252 p.sw  0, 4(a5!)  a5=10000010  a5:1000000c  PA:1000000c

The event information dumped for executed instructions is using the following format: ::

  <address> <instruction> <operands> <operands info>

<address> is the address of the instruction.

<instruction> is the instruction label.

<operands> is the part of the decoded operands.

<operands info> is giving details about the operands values and how they are used.

The latter information is using the following convention:

  - When a register is accessed, its name is displayed followed by *=* if it is written or *:* if it is read. In case it is read and written, the register appears twice. It is followed by its value, which is the new one in case it is written.

  - When a memory access is done, *PA:* is displayed, followed by the address of the access.

  - The order of the statements is following the order on the decoded instruction

The memory accesses which are displayed are particularly interesting for tracking memory corruptions as they can be used to look for accesses to specific locations.


VCD traces
----------

The virtual platform can dump VCD traces which show the state of several components over the time, like the cores PC, the DMA transfers, etc, and thus gives a better overview than the system traces.

Configuration
.............

VCD tracing can be activated through the following option: ::

  pulp-run --platform=gvsoc --config=gap_rev1 --binary=test prepare run --event=.*

Once the platform is run, this will generate a VCD file called *all.vcd* in the build folder.



Display
.......

Any VCD viewer can be used to display the traces. On Linux the free gtkwave viewer can be used. For example to display the PC traces, you can launch it with: ::

  gtkwave <vcdFilePath>

Then click on Search->Search Signal Regexp, enter "pc", click on Select All and Insert, and close the box. You should now see the PC traces in the view, you can zoom out to see the full window.

.. Gtkwave script generation
.. .........................

.. In case gtkwave is used, a script can be automatically generated that will pre-configure all interesting signals. For that the following option must be used: ::

..   $ make clean all run CONFIG_OPT="gvsoc/vcd/active gvsoc/vcd/gtkw"

.. You should see at the beginning of the simulation that says that a script has been generated. Just open it with gtkwave and you should see all signals already configured in the view.

.. This view contains some pre-defined groups that are very useful for quickly opening and closing architectures parts. It also contains a group called debug, that contains more high-level debug information like function name, disassembled instructions and so on.


Application profiling
---------------------

The virtual platform is for now not providing any particular feature in terms of profiling except for hardware performance counters whose most of them are modeled.

To use them, the test should configure and use them as on the real silicon, with the difference that on gvsoc all performance counters are implemented, not only one.



Timing models
-------------

Timing models are always active, there is no specific option to set to activate them. They are mainly timing the core model so that the main stalls are modeled. This includes branch penalty, load-use penalty an so on. The rest of the architecture is slightly timed. Remote accesses are assigned a fixed cost and are impacted by bandwidth limitation, although this still not reflect exactly the HW (the bus width may be different). L1 contentions are modeled with no priority. DMA is modeled with bursts, which gets assigned a cost. All UDMA interfaces are finely modeled.



Power models
------------

This is for now a very preliminary work. Power traces can be showed when VCD traces are activated. Each power source is able to register an amount of energy, which is showed inside a VCD trace as a pulse.

For now only the core is registering the energy consumed by an instruction, but all instructions are assigned a fixed cost, which just has an arbitrary value.

A more detailed power report will soon be produced, and power sources added.



Devices
-------

The virtual platform is by default simulating only a stand-alone chip with a few default devices which are required to boot a simple example. Device models such as camera, flash or microphones can be connected in order to run full applications.

The devices to be simulated must be specified using the standard runner feature for customizing peripherals, see :ref:`device_config`.


.. GDB
.. ---

.. To use GDB with the virtual platform, the Pulp debug bridge must be used to connect to the virtual platform
.. and to open an RSP server where GDB can be connected to communicate with the virtual platform as if the real
.. chip would be used.

.. For that, the application must first be configured with the following option: ::

..   $ make conf gdb=1

.. Then the virtual platform must be launched with the usual command: ::

..   $ make run

.. This should start the virtual platform but quickly stop waiting for an incoming connection with the following 
.. message: ::

..   Proxy listening on port 37539

.. The Pulp debug bridge must then be launched and connected from another terminal with the same SDK configured
.. in the same way, with the following command: ::

..   $ plpbridge --config=<config file path> gdb wait --rsp-port=2345

.. The config file must be the one generated for the application being debugged. Its path
.. can be seen on the pulp-run command which is generated when *make run* is executed.

.. The RSP port can be any port, it just needs to correspond to the one used when opening GDB.

.. Then from another terminal, GDB must be launched and connected: ::

..   $ riscv32-unknown-elf-gdb
..   $ (gdb) target remote :2345

.. The port specified here must be the same as the one specified in the plpbridge command.

.. There are currently a few GDB issues. First it is using by default the 64bit mode if no binary is specified.
.. So a binary must always be specified until this is fixed (with option file). Then breakpoints with compressed instructions generate a GDB error. To avoid it, the following gdb property must be set: ::

..   $ (gdb) set riscv use_compressed_breakpoint off

.. There are also a few limitations, watchpoints are not supported.

Most usefull commands
---------------------

For activating instruction traces with debug symbols: ::

  pulp-run --platform=gvsoc --config=gap_rev1 --binary=test prepare run --trace=insn --debug-syms

For activating all traces: ::

  pulp-run --platform=gvsoc --config=gap_rev1 --binary=test prepare run --trace=.*

For activating VCD traces (traces are dumped to the file *all.vcd): ::

  pulp-run --platform=gvsoc --config=gap_rev1 --binary=test prepare run --event=.*
